This Qur'an guides us to the path of goodness, it guides us. Allah subhanahu wa sallam has sent it down, and the Messenger of Allah is our teacher, the Messenger of Allah is our teacher.
Bismillah ar-Rahman ar-Rahim
My dear brothers and sisters, Salamu alaykum wa rahmatullahi wa barakatuh
So we're going to be discussing the fourth hadith of Imam an-Nawawi's 40 hadith, and this is actually a very relevant hadith and there's a lot of lessons that need to be learned from this hadith.
So let us start off with the very beginning of the hadith, where Imam an-Nawawi says
So this hadith is narrated by Abdullah ibn Mas'ud and Abdullah ibn Mas'ud was one of the early companions that accepted Islam in Mecca.
Now you'll notice that he starts off this hadith by saying that the Messenger of Allah sallallahu alayhi wasallam and he is a sadiq al-masduq.
The term a sadiq means he is the one that speaks the truth, and al-masduq it means the person whose honesty has been proven, whose honesty has been proven and legislated.
Now why does Abdullah ibn Mas'ud start off with this disclaimer that he is the trustworthy one and his trustworthiness has been affirmed?
The reason why Abdullah ibn Mas'ud starts off with this disclaimer is because of the content that is going to be coming into this hadith.
As we know that when Islam first came the Messenger of Allah sallallahu alayhi wasallam himself was unable to read and write and this was the case of the vast majority of people.
So even in terms of progress, in terms of science and particularly medical studies, very little was discovered.
And with the coming of Islam, science progressed very very quickly in terms of its theoretical knowledge because Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala revealed knowledge that was unknown to mankind at that time.
And that was the knowledge of how the human being is formed.
So if you look inside the very first verses of Surah Al-Mu'minun, you'll notice that Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala discusses the concept of how the fetus is formed and what happens in the womb and the different stages of human life at that time.
And this is why Abdullah ibn Mas'ud radiAllahu anhu, he starts off with this disclaimer that he is a sadiq al-masduq.
Can someone just ask the brothers who are talking in the back to please stay quiet inshallah?
JazakAllah khayran.
And this is why he gives this disclaimer that he is a sadiq al-masduq.
Now what is the effect of this disclaimer in terms of aqidah, in terms of our faith?
What effect does this have?
It has a huge effect my dear brothers and sisters.
And that effect is that anything the messenger of Allah sallallahu alayhi wasallam came with, it needs to be accepted.
So anything that is authentically attributed to the messenger of Allah sallallahu alayhi wasallam, it cannot be rejected whatsoever.
In surah al-hujurat, Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala, he describes the believers.
He says they are the ones that believe in Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala and the messenger.
And then they have no doubt about this whatsoever.
So anything that the messenger of Allah sallallahu alayhi wasallam came with or Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala said,
then it has to be accepted without a shadow of a doubt.
So now a situation arises.
What if there is a hadith that is in contradiction?
And it's in contradiction to two things.
Number one, with another hadith.
And number two, with science.
So let's talk about in terms of hadith being in contradiction to other revelations.
So we'll make it general, not just other hadith, but other revelations.
Whether it is the Quran or the Sunnah, how do you deal with contradictions between different forms of revelation?
Imam ibn Khuzaymah rahimahu Allah, he died in the year 311.
He died in the year 311 and he made a very pompous claim.
And that claim was that anyone that ever finds any contradiction in revelation between either one hadith or another
or one hadith in the Quran, then let him bring it to me.
Then let him bring it to me and I will reconcile it for him.
And I will reconcile it for him.
So the point that he was trying to make is that there is not going to be any contradiction in revelation
because the source of that revelation is one.
That source of revelation is one.
So what are possible reasons that one may find an apparent contradiction?
Because it's not going to be a real contradiction.
But what are reasons that a person might find an apparent contradiction?
And you're going to find three main reasons for that.
Three main reasons for that.
Reason number one is that it is not authentically established.
So particularly when it comes to a hadith, you will find some hadith that may contradict one another.
But some of them are authentic, others of them are not.
And if something is inauthentic, then obviously it cannot be used as a proof.
It cannot be used as a proof.
A second reason why you may find contradiction, apparent contradiction between revelation
is the concept of nasikh and mansukh, is the concept of abrogation.
So Islam came as a very practical religion.
And that being said, there are certain things that were revealed gradually.
They weren't revealed all at one time.
The easiest example of this is that of alcohol.
Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala, when He prohibited alcohol, it was prohibited in three main stages.
It was prohibited in three main stages.
Until Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala finally prohibited alcohol altogether.
So that is a second reason why a person may find an apparent contradiction.
But in reality, it isn't a contradiction.
It's just that something has abrogated the command or has abrogated the ruling.
The third reason why a person may find a contradiction.
And that is that in reality, that concept or that point is not from the messenger of Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala himself.
But from a sahabi. It's from a sahabi.
So when the sahabi or the person narrating the hadith,
he actually introduces something from himself into the hadith itself.
And the reason why I mention this one in particular is because this is something we're going to see in this hadith.
Where Abdullah bin Mas'ud radiAllahu anhu, he introduced something from himself to explain something from the hadith.
To explain something from the hadith.
So we need to find out that, yes, even if it is authentic,
are these truly the words of the messenger of Allah sallallahu alayhi wa sallam?
Or is there something introduced from the sahabi himself?
From the sahabi himself.
A fourth reason that you will find apparent contradiction.
And that is particularly when it comes to the hadith as opposed to the Quran.
The Quran is preserved in wording and in meaning.
Meaning that the wording of the Quran will never change.
The meaning of the Quran will never change.
Whereas the hadith of the messenger of Allah sallallahu alayhi wa sallam,
they are preserved in meaning and not necessarily in wording.
Meaning that the sahaba radiAllahu anhu,
they used to take the luxury that if they did not remember the word,
they would use a term that was synonymous with that term.
So as long as the meaning was preserved, they didn't have a problem narrating the hadith.
And sometimes a person or a sahabi or the person narrating the hadith
may use a term that is not truly synonymous
and that is what causes the contradiction.
And that is what causes the contradiction.
So those are four primary reasons.
And the scholars have listed up to seven, some of them even up to ten,
different reasons why a person may find an apparent contradiction.
But in reality it will not be a contradiction.
Now we get to issue number two.
And that is what if an individual finds an apparent contradiction
between science and revelation.
And rather than using the term science, we're going to use the term intellect.
Because science is a product of our intellects.
And this is the term that the earlier scholars used.
And one of the great, I guess, thesis is, if you want to call it that,
that was written on this subject,
was written by Shaykh al-Islam Ibn Taymiyyah rahimahu Allah.
It was called,
that removing all of the doubts relating to the contradictions
between intellect and revelation.
So the first thing that's important to understand over here
is that the source of revelation and the creator of the intellect,
again, is one and the same.
So if they are both from the creator,
then there shouldn't be any contradiction.
Then there shouldn't be any contradiction.
So where will the contradiction come from?
Where will the contradiction come from?
The contradiction will come from two main cases in this situation.
Case number one is that there is a flaw in the understanding.
There is a flaw in the understanding.
A flaw in the logic.
So logical deduction that mankind comes to,
that's where the flaw is.
Whereas the text within of itself is perfectly fine,
and there's no issue with it whatsoever.
A second reason that actually,
sticking to the first reason first,
another thing related to reason number one is that
there's a flaw in logic or a flaw in the deduction,
is that this can also be applied to progress in science.
So as science progresses and as science develops,
obviously theories will change, right?
And as what was known as a fact 50 years ago
is no longer considered a fact now,
because our understanding of the world,
our understanding of science is developing.
So this will go under category number one.
Then the second reason why a person may find a contradiction
or an apparent contradiction between intellect and revelation,
then this is from one of the points from part number one,
and that is that perhaps there is the narration
that is being referred to is inauthentic.
Perhaps the narration that is being referred to is inauthentic.
So those are generally how the scholars address
the issue of contradiction between revelation
and contradiction between science and intellect within themselves.
Two people that paid a lot of attention to this
from the people of the past was Ibn Taymiyyah Rahimullah
in his thesis, Dhar Tahrid al-Aqal al-Naqal.
And in our time, someone who paid more close attention
to the concept of revelation within of itself
was Shaykh Muhammad Amin al-Shanqiti.
So Shaykh Muhammad Amin al-Shanqiti, Rahimahu Allah Ta'ala,
what he did was he took all of the verses
and all of the hadith that people had a problem with.
So the hadith that the sun bows down
to the Arsh of Allah Subhanahu wa Ta'ala every day
as it rises and sets.
And the hadith that if one part of the wing of the fly
has the poison in it, then the other part of the wing
has the cure in it.
All these narrations people will have a problem with.
They're like, how do we understand these things?
How can this actually be true?
And Shaykh Muhammad Amin al-Shanqiti, he has a book
that he compiled dealing with all the verses
and the hadith that are problematic on the apparent.
And you can research more about that book, bi'idhnillah ta'ala.
So that is why Abdullah ibn Mas'ud radiAllahu anhu
started off with this disclaimer that
he is al-sadiq al-masduq, that anything that comes
from the messenger of Allah Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam,
his truthfulness, his trustworthiness
has already been established.
So you cannot deny it, because to doubt it
or to deny it, then this would be disbelief.
If you were to doubt it or to deny it,
then this would be disbelief.
Now let's actually get into the actual text
of the hadith itself.
So we're going to just say it in English
with the exception of one part, bi'idhnillah ta'ala.
So he says,
So the messenger of Allah Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam,
he talks about the very concept
of how human beings are developed.
And this is one of the scientific miracles of the Quran.
So obviously this knowledge was not known
at the time of the messenger of Allah Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam,
not with the doctors, not with the Muslims,
not with the previous religions,
but this is one of the things that Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
revealed to prove that this was a revelation
from Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala himself.
And this brings us to a topic of,
one of the criticisms that is made against the Quran
is a criticism known as Hegerism.
And what Hegerism actually is,
is it is an accusation against the Prophet Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam
that he compiled the Quran from previous sources.
So they say that when the Prophet Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam
went to go see Waraqa ibn Naufal,
that's when he had knowledge of the Bible.
So he took some of the Bible and made it into the Quran.
And when the Prophet Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam came to Medina,
he had interaction with the Jews of Medina,
and he took some of the Torah
and he put that into the Quran as well.
And that is how the Prophet Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam put the Quran together.
And that is in just brief summary what Hegerism actually is.
Now, one of the simplest ways to refute that concept
is how about that material that isn't found inside of the previous scriptures.
And this is a clear example of it.
That the form of how human beings were formed and developed
is not mentioned in any of the previous scriptures.
But rather this is something that Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
revealed in the Quran itself.
And something like this in our day and age,
it may not uplift our Iman
because alhamdulillah science has now reached that level
where we understand these things.
In fact, so much so that, you know,
when a couple who is expecting a baby,
they go to a doctor now,
even before the baby is born they can tell
what the gender is.
And I'm not just talking about, you know,
just a simple...
What's the word called?
Not even the ultrasound.
It's not the ultrasound. I'm thinking of a different word.
But the simple version of it is the ultrasound.
But even the ultrasound has been taken to a next level.
Like the ultrasound is usually just in 2D form
and it's like black and white.
But now technology has come to such a level
it actually creates a 3D image of the baby
and you can see a 3D image of the baby
while it's inside the mother's womb.
And that is how far technology has come.
So in our day and age it may not uplift our spirits
but you can imagine for the Bedouin man
that has no understanding of how, you know,
the human being is developed.
Or even the philosopher at that time.
If you look at, you know,
Aristotelian philosophy and how they perceived
the development of human being,
they just considered it, you know,
one tiny, tiny human being.
And that tiny human being over time
gradually grew inside the mother's stomach
and that's what came out.
So that's what the Greek philosophers of old
used to assume.
That's what happened with the human being.
And that's how the human being came about.
But Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala for the first time
introduces to mankind the concept of
how the fetus actually develops.
Now the first stage, as mentioned,
of the messenger of Allah sallallahu alayhi wa sallam over here
is that of the combination of the two fluids.
Is the combination of the two fluids.
Now when looking at this subject
from the Quran and the Ahadith,
there's two important distinctions to keep in mind.
One was the creation of Adam, alayhi salam,
and the second was the creation
of human beings themselves.
And a lot of the times people will get this confused.
So Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala when he talks about the creation
of Adam, alayhi salam,
or the creation of mankind as a whole,
Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala will say that mankind as a whole
was created from dust or was created from dirt.
And people assume that, hey,
Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala is saying that our creation
came from dust and dirt.
Yes, as a species that's how Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
created Adam, alayhi salam.
Whereas all of us now,
we're past that stage.
Our first stage is this phase known as the nutfa.
The first phase is known as the nutfa.
And that is the combination of the two liquids,
the liquid of the male and the liquid of the female.
As they climax, that liquid is released.
And subhanAllah, if you study this,
this is like one of the greatest miracles
that Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala has created.
And inshaAllah, I don't think
we have any young kids here.
Do we have any young kids here?
I don't want to give them
their first introduction to sex ed here.
Do we have any kids here?
No kids, right?
Speak freely.
Speak freely, not too freely.
Shyness is from Islam.
So just to keep it very simple,
the miraculous point that I'm talking about
is that Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala will send one egg
from the woman's womb.
And this one egg will be approached
literally by millions and hundreds
of thousands of sperm.
And it is just one of the millions,
one of the hundreds of thousands
out of the various possibilities
that could happen at that time
that one gets selected and one gets chosen.
And through that combination,
that is where the human being comes from.
That is where the human being comes from.
And then the second phase of this miraculous nature
is how from two liquids,
Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala brings about a solid.
From two liquids,
Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala brings about a solid
of flesh, of skin, of bone, of intellect,
from two things that have no value whatsoever.
You can't do anything with those liquids
other than reproduce human creation,
SubhanAllah.
So it shows you the miraculous nature of this.
So this is the first phase
that the Messenger of Allah sallallahu alayhi wa sallam is referring to.
Now what's important about this aspect of the hadith
is that the term nutfa,
is it actually a part of the hadith,
or is this something that Abdullah bin Mas'ud radiAllahu anhu
introduced into the hadith?
So the first thing we look at
is that if you look at the versions of this hadith,
and this hadith is mentioned by many, many people.
It's mentioned by Bukhari, by Muslim, by Ahmad,
by Abu Dawud, by Tirmidhi and Ibn Majah.
So a lot of the major collections of hadith,
they will have this hadith.
When you look at the version of Bukhari and Muslim though,
you will find that the term nutfa
is not actually a part of it.
The term nutfa is not actually a part of it.
And this is one of the earliest indications
that shows us that this was idraaj.
And what idraaj actually means,
it was introduced by the companion himself
to explain this concept.
So why is this so important and relevant?
Why is this important and relevant?
It is important and relevant because
once you introduce this term nutfa,
then it changes the whole meaning of the hadith.
Because with the term nutfa,
it means that the first 40 days of this phase
is known as the nutfa phase.
And then you have a second 40-day phase,
and then you have a third 40-day phase.
That is the implication of it.
And you'll see from a fiqh perspective,
that has a huge implication for two reasons.
Number one is the issue of the janaza.
The issue of the janaza.
Because if we say that each phase is 40,
and then the soul is introduced
at the 120th day,
then that means that the janaza should only be prayed
after the 120th day.
And likewise, the issue of abortion.
Has a woman killed a soul
when she has an abortion
before 40 days, after 40 days,
after 120 days?
What is the issue here?
So that is why the term nutfa is of the utmost significance
in this narration.
And Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala knows best,
but the term nutfa is not actually a part of the hadith.
It was not said by the messenger of Allah sallallahu alayhi wa sallam.
And this obviously has great ramifications now.
And that great ramification being
that rather than the soul being introduced
on the 120th day,
now the new meaning of the hadith
is that the soul is introduced
on the 40th day.
That the new meaning is that the soul is introduced
And we'll discuss some of these issues
as we go along.
So, the first phase is that
he is assembled in his mother's womb
for 40 days,
and then he is a drop of fluid.
That is the term nutfa,
that is the iddaraj from
Abdullah bin Mas'ud radiAllahu anhu.
Then it becomes a clot for a similar period.
The second phase
is the phase known as alaqah.
And when blood becomes
clotted or coagulated,
that is when it becomes alaqah.
And this is the second phase
that he is meeting, it now becomes
a form of blood.
And this clot of blood
where it becomes coagulated and jelly-like
it actually clings to the womb.
So here Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
is giving us a second insight
in terms of what's happening.
So it's not just inside the womb,
but it's clinging to the uterus at that time.
And this is something again the doctors did not know
and Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala tells us about.
And this is the second phase
of it where it becomes an alaqah.
And then thereafter,
it is a lump looking like,
and the term over here used is mudghah.
The term mudghah over here
is a lump-like looking thing.
And to get a clear example of
mudghah is that I want you to
imagine that you've been chewing
a piece of gum. When you take
that piece of gum out, what does that gum
look like? That gum will look like
all wrinkly and
shaped up in a curved form.
That's exactly what a mudghah is.
It's like a chewed piece of flesh,
a chewed piece of meat.
That is the third phase that Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
is referring to over here
for a similar period.
Then an angel is sent to him
who breathes the rooh into him.
And we said that this is where the ikhtilaf
takes place amongst the scholars.
That is it at 40 days
or is it at 120 days?
Because if it's at 40 days,
then it means that all three phases
took place within the
40 days. However, if we say that
nutfa is a part of the hadith,
then nutfa is for 40 days
and alaqa is for 40 days
and mudghah
is for 40 days.
And that gives us 120 days
and 120 days.
This angel is commanded to write
blows the spirit into him.
Actually, let's comment on this.
The concept of the spirit.
Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala,
he refers to the spirit in surat al-Isra
where Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala he says
يَسْأَلُونَكَ عَنِ الْرُّحِ
that the people, they ask you
about this spirit.
And Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala concludes the discussion
by saying that this is from the knowledge
of Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
وَمَا أُوْتِيْتُمْ مِنَ الْعِلْمِ
إِلَّا قَلِيلًا
And you have not been given of knowledge
except for a little bit.
Now what exactly does that mean you have not been given
except a little bit of knowledge?
There's obviously the general understanding
that our knowledge compared to the knowledge
of Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
is that comparing finite numbers to infinity.
Right? That's the relationship
between our knowledge to Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala.
But there's a greater implication
over here. And that greater implication
my dear brothers and sisters
is the miraculous nature of
life itself. Do we have any doctors
in the house by any ways? We have a doctor here?
Alhamdulillah. So you can collaborate
this if I make a mistake inshallah.
And I'll try to keep it as simple as possible.
I want you to imagine that
we take someone's heart.
May Allah protect you Hisham. We take your heart.
We take Sajjad's brain.
We take
Rizwan's body
as a whole.
And we'll take someone else's blood. We'll take Ahmad's blood.
Now we have a brain,
we have a heart, we have the whole body,
and we have Ahmad's blood.
If we were to put all of these things
together, could we create
human life? Could we create human life?
You have a functioning heart, a functioning mind,
functioning blood,
a functioning body. Everything is there
that physically is needed
to create human life,
you still wouldn't be able to create human life.
Because from a Muslim's perspective,
what brings life into the individual
is the Ruh that Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
places therein.
And when Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala decrees for
that Ruh to be taken out, even though
you may have a perfectly healthy body,
life will cease to exist.
Life will cease to exist.
And this is the miraculous nature of
...
that you do not have except
a little bit of knowledge. That even with
as far as we've progressed,
we do not understand truly
what this Ruh is that Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
has created.
And this is what the Ruh is referring to
over here.
Then he goes on to say
then an angel is sent to him who breathes
the Ruh into him, and this angel is
He is commanded to write for decrees.
He is commanded to write for things.
He is commanded to write down his rizq.
He is commanded to write down his life span.
He is commanded to write down
his deeds, and whether he will
be from the happy people or
the wretched people.
Commenting briefly on the happy people
or the wretched people.
This is not just referring to happiness
and wretchedness in this life,
but it is referring to the greater element
of happiness versus
meaning the people of Jannah versus wretchedness
being the people of Nar and
Jahannam. That is what it is
referring to. Now this
leads us into the element of
Qadr. You know, and we're going to
have a bigger discussion on Qadr
in the second part of this hadith.
But our belief in Qadr as
Muslims consists of four levels.
Does anyone know what the four levels
of our belief in Qadr are?
We've discussed this a couple of times in
the past. Our Qadr,
our belief in Qadr as Muslims,
consists of four different levels.
We need to believe in four different things
to properly believe in Qadr.
Any Muslims in the house?
Go for it.
Okay, so those are the different
types of Qadr, but I'm talking
the different levels of Qadr we have to
believe in.
I think
Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
before the creation of Earth
made all, I mean
at what given time I really don't
know what, He created all the human beings
at one time. And He told everybody to
bow. And then everybody bowed.
Then, that's the reason
the kafirs are there. Because kafirs
previously had bowed, and
that time they did not bow
later on when they went down
to the earth. So
Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala has already created
all human beings, all of us,
and has given us our
nasib also, our Qadr.
That's the first thing. Second thing is
Okay, I'll let you finish
then I'll comment on it. Go ahead, please continue.
And then
the other thing is that
once the person comes down
to the earth, of course as per
the narration, when the person is
born in the
womb, in the uterus of the
mother, that time
the Qadr or his
fate has already been created.
Now there is a concept about
if for example the person is a good
doer, he is a mu'min, right? And he
has a calamity.
Does he have similar type of calamity?
Does he have exactly the same?
No, it gets modified a little bit.
And that because of
even the Qadr changes.
Even the Qadr changes. If the person is
really a good pious Muslim,
then he will not have that same exposure
of calamity as a kafir person.
And that's why it
says that even the calamity
or the degree of
the bala or the degree of
the bad
effect or an accident or something
can also be modified.
That's your understanding.
You went on a completely different tangent.
But for the most part what you're saying is accurate.
For the most part what you're saying is accurate.
Just to make a brief commentary on the first thing that you were saying.
That Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala created all human beings.
That's not 100% true.
Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala created our spirits
before our physical bodies were created.
And that's the world of the
rooh. And this is if you refer to
Surah Al-A'raf
Surah number 7 verse 172.
Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala talks about this concept of
the Mithaq. And the Mithaq is a
covenant that Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala took.
Where he asked all of the souls
Am I not your Lord?
So there wasn't actual bowing down, but he posed the question
to them. That am I not your Lord?
And everyone said yes.
So that is the first part that you were talking about.
And we'll talk about the second part in my discussion over here.
So talking about the maratib of qadr
that are compulsory to believe in.
So these are the levels of qadr that in order
to understand qadr, in order to
be a believer, you may not know the
terminologies, but you have to agree with
these general concepts. And there are
four levels, so let's everyone memorize them
now. Number one
is that Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
has ultimate knowledge of
four things. Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
has ultimate knowledge of four things.
The past, the present,
the future,
and if there was a way to have an
alternate reality, then Allah subhanahu
wa ta'ala would have known that as well.
So that is how vast Allah subhanahu
wa ta'ala's knowledge is. And that
is the first element of qadr that Allah
subhanahu wa ta'ala knows everything.
There is nothing that is hidden from Allah subhanahu
wa ta'ala. The second
element of qadr is that
our qadr, what is written
down for us, was written
down 50,000 years
before the creation of the heavens and the
earth. Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
created the pen and He told the pen to write
and the pen wrote everything that will exist
from that time till
the day of judgment. So anything
that is meant to happen in our lives
doesn't happen by chance.
It doesn't happen just out of a random act,
but Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
has meticulously and diligently
planned this all together.
So all of this was written down
50,000 years before.
And this is going to take us into our
discussion what Hisham was talking about.
The different types of writing
of qadr. So the greatest form of writing
of the qadr is known as
the lauh al-mahfudh. And that is what was
written 50,000 years before the
creation of the heavens
and the earth.
And we'll talk about the different types of writings
after I finish the four points.
Point number three is that
nothing happens
except by the will of Allah subhanahu
wa ta'ala. Except by the will
of Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala.
The term in Arabic is mashia.
And there's two terms that are used
synonymously, but are not
used synonymously. And it is at
this third stage of our
belief in qadr that people make the greatest
amount of mistakes. And that is
that they are unable to
differentiate between the mashia of Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
the will of Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
versus the irada
of Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala versus
what Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala actually
wants for us. And we'll explain this
as well. So the third level
is that nothing happens
except by the will of Allah subhanahu
wa ta'ala. And then the
fourth level, and this is the final and fourth level
is that all
of our actions
are created. All of our actions
are created.
The good of them are from
Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala. The
bad of them are from our own selves.
The bad of them are from our own selves.
So these are the four levels of
qadr. Can anyone repeat
them back to me?
Go for it. So the first one is
that Allah has knowledge of everything.
The second one is that it depends on the
50,000 years of civilization.
The third one is that
all the good and bad
are from Allah
and the bad comes from us.
And the third one is
nothing happens except
by the will of Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala.
So now let's expand
on these points. And you'll see the significance
of writing these things down because I'm telling
you you're not going to remember this if you're trying to memorize
this at the end of the halaqa.
So talking about
point number two now
with the writing down of the qadr.
The writing down of the qadr.
The greatest form of the writing down of qadr
is the qadr that was written down in
al-Lawh al-Mahfuz. And this is the qadr
that will never ever change. Whatever is written down
in al-Lawh al-Mahfuz, this can never
ever change.
Then the second type of qadr
is the qadr which is written down
at the birth of the child.
At the birth of the child. And these are the
four things that are, sorry not
the birth, when the spirit is
blown into the child. That these four things are
written. That his rizq, the span
of his life, his deeds,
and whether he will be happy
or wretched. Meaning ahlul jannah
or ahlul naar.
So those are the four things that are written down
at the time of when the spirit
is blown in. And this is from the qadr
that can be changed.
And we'll talk about how qadr can actually
be changed. Then the third
type of qadr that is written down.
And that is the qadr that is written
down every year on the
night of Laylatul Qadr. On the night of
Laylatul Qadr itself. Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
has the angels write down
qadr at that time.
Some of the scholars have had
an opinion that there is a fourth type
of qadr. And that is a qadr that
is written down on a daily basis.
That is a qadr that is written down
on a daily basis.
And that is from the verse in
Suratul Rahman where Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
says,
That every day Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
has an affair.
And he said that this affair is the writing down
of the qadr. But this was held by
some of the predecessors and
not all of the predecessors held this opinion.
So this leads us into
what does it mean that qadr can be
changed. So what is written in the
al-Lawh al-Mahfuz is the final decree.
And only Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala knows
what is inside al-Lawh al-Mahfuz.
No one else knows what is inside al-Lawh al-
Mahfuz. That is the final decree.
The second types of the writing
will call the rest of the types, the second type.
And those are the types that the angels
know. Those are the things that the angels
know that they will be dictated
by Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala. But as they
are gradually happening and they can gradually
change as well. What changes those things?
A person making
dua. So the messenger of Allah says that
nothing changes qadr like
dua. So the angels
write down one thing. A person makes
dua. Allah changes their fate
from the second type of qadr.
And that is what it means qadr changing.
Likewise, committing sins,
they cut off a person's risk.
A person is supposed to have an X, Y, Z amount of rizq
destined for them. That's what's
in al-Lawh al-Mahfuz. That's not going to change.
But however, what the angels write,
the more sins you commit, then the less
risk you will actually have. And the
angels will just subtract that as well.
In terms of one's lifespan, the messenger
of Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala tells us
that nothing elongates one's lifespan
like the keeping of good
relationship with one's family
members, right? So this is from the second
type of qadr. It is not from the qadr that is
written in al-Lawh al-Mahfuz.
Then the third stage
of belief we set is to believe
in the will of Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
and how nothing happens except by the
will of Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala. So what
is the difference between mashia and
irada? The will of Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
and what Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
wants for us. The mashia
of Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala is only
of one type. What Allah wills
will happen. That's what it means.
When Allah wills something, it will happen.
You can try your utmost best
to prevent it from happening. Try
to avoid it as much as you possibly can
but there's nothing you can do to
get out of it. Then the second
thing is the irada of Allah
subhanahu wa ta'ala. And the irada
of Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala is of two types.
And that is al-qawniyyah
and al-shariyyah. The qawniyyah
is referring to the matters
of this world. That Allah wants
the sun to set. Allah
wants the moon and stars to come
out. Allah wants it to
rain. So this has nothing to do with us
but this has to do with the external
creation. Right?
So there's no element of reward
or punishment related to
al-irada al-qawniyyah.
That you will not be questioned about when the sun
set and when it rose and when the rain
came down. You're not going to be questioned about that.
However the second type of
wanting which is al-irada
al-shariyyah. And these are the things
that Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala wants
from us. But we have
the free will to do them or not.
And this is what we will be
judged upon. So Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
gave us the commandment to pray.
We will be judged upon did we pray or
not. Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala told us to be
good to our parents. We will be
questioned about were we good to our parents
or not. So this is the irada
al-shariyyah. And this is where a lot of
people make a mistake that hey if Allah
has destined everything. He wants
me to be good. I will be good.
Right? The mistake is in this
third level over here. That do not
confuse the mashia of Allah subhanahu
wa ta'ala with the irada
al-shariyyah of Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala.
So what Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala will force into
happening is not the same thing
as what Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
expects from you or wants you
to do in your life.
And then the fourth and last level of qadr
we said is that all of
our actions are created.
However, the goodness of
them, then that is a result from
Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala. Whereas
the bad of them, then
this is a result of our own deeds.
This is a result of our own deeds and our
own doing. And the clearest
indication of this as the Prophet
salallahu alayhi wasalam made it very
very clear.
That when he
used to make dua to Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
he used to say, and no evil is
attributed to you. And Allah
subhanahu wa ta'ala, he tells us in the Quran
ظهر الفساد في البر والبحر
بما كسبت
أيدي الناس. That
fasad, evil and wickedness
has become present in this
world as a result
not of Allah's will but because of
the evil actions that mankind
themselves used to do. So evil is
attributed to man and it is never
attributed to Allah subhanahu
wa ta'ala. Now
as a sub-point related to this,
this relates to the concept of
good and evil in Islam.
That from a Muslim's perspective, is there
such a thing as absolute
complete evil?
And the answer to that is no.
There is nothing that Allah subhanahu
wa ta'ala has created that is
100% absolute
evil. And
when my teacher was explaining
this, he used a funny joke, I don't know
since this is being recorded and live, how well it's
going to work, but he said there's nothing that's 100%
absolute pure evil,
not even your mother-in-law.
That's what he said.
So I'm just narrating it as he said it.
So even
if you were to look at the concept of
iblis and shaitan, is iblis
and shaitan 100%
pure evil? And the answer
to that is from our perspective, no
that is not the case. How so?
The reason that is, my dear brothers and
sisters, because
if iblis and shaitan did not exist,
then we would have no temptations
to fight off, with which we would not
incur any good deeds. If iblis
and shaitan did not exist, we would not
say a'oodhu billahi min shaitani
ar-rajim and get rewarded
for that act. So it is through the
presence of iblis that these
good deeds are possibly done.
Had iblis not existed, then those
deeds could not have been
done. So that in summary
is the portion of the hadith
of the wording of the messenger of Allah sallallahu alaihi
wa sallam. The next part of
this narration, they are from the words
of Abdullah bin Mas'ud. They are from the words
of Abdullah bin Mas'ud, and we'll go
through it very quickly and briefly
bi dhinnahi ta'ala. He says,
I swear by Allah, and there is
no god other than He, one of you
may perform the deeds of the people of
paradise till there is not an
arm's length between Him and it.
Then that which has been written
will come forth, and He will become
from the people of the hellfire.
And one of you may perform the deeds of the
people of the hellfire till there is not
between Him and arm's length and it,
then that which has been written will come forth
and overtake Him, and He will become
from the people of paradise and will
enter into it.
So now,
this is from the statements of
Abdullah bin Mas'ud radiallahu
anhu. And he
starts off by swearing, by taking an oath
by Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala, and this is
a technique that is used to make a
person believe. So a person says
something, you know, I will do something
and, you know,
you might not believe them, but when the person says
wallahi I will do it, you
know, you take it more seriously. You think a person
is more dedicated that they're swearing by Allah.
Right? Unless, actually I don't
want to insult the Somalis here, but if they
say it then it has a different meaning altogether.
No offense, inshallah.
So a person takes an
oath and that is for the sake of emphasis
that look, this is really how it is
to make people have conviction and belief
in this. Now the reason
why this is accepted as a part of
the hadith, this is the reason why this is accepted
as a part of hadith. This is
one of the principles of the science of hadith
that if a sahabi ever
speaks about a matter of the unseen,
even though it is not a
hadith, it takes the ruling of a hadith.
It takes the ruling of the words of the messenger
of Allah sallallahu alayhi wasallam, because
he couldn't have known this subject matter
had it not been for the messenger of Allah sallallahu alayhi
wasallam. And that is why this portion
of the hadith, even though it is from the words
of Abdullah bin Mas'ud radiAllahu
anhu, it takes the ruling of a hadith
because he couldn't have known this other
than through the messenger of Allah.
And this is further proven through narrations of Bukhari
and Muslim that the messenger of Allah sallallahu alayhi wasallam
made similar statements to this.
And that is that a person will do
the actions of the people of paradise
until Qadr overtakes him
and then he goes to the hellfire.
And vice versa, the opposite
as well. Now how do
we explain this subject matter?
How do we explain this subject matter?
That how is it fair that a person does
the actions of the people of Jannah
and then all of a sudden Qadr overtakes him
and he is thrown into the
hellfire. The way we explain
this is that we have a simple
principle in hadith. And this
is a foundation that you should develop
for your deen altogether.
But if you want to understand anything in this
religion, never take an
isolated verse, never take an isolated
hadith and try to develop
a complete understanding.
If you want to develop a complete understanding
of a subject matter, you have to have
all of the texts related to that
subject matter. So when you combine
all of the texts of
hadith and Quran
pertaining to Qadr, pertaining to this
subject matter, you will find
two things. Two things.
Number one is that
on the appearance, it seemed
like this person was doing actions
of the people of Paradise.
But in reality, this person could
have been a hypocrite. That he was hiding
his hypocrisy and then he was thrown
into the hellfire because it became apparent
of his hypocrisy. And that
is why that is the case.
Right? So that is issue
number one is that the person was
a hypocrite. Number two
is that maybe it did
not reach the level of hypocrisy
but there is no
sincerity in his actions.
So a person is doing all of these deeds
that seem great, but in reality
there is no sincerity in his
actions. There is no sincerity in
his actions. And that is why he is thrown
into the hellfire. So that
explains the first portion of the hadith.
Where a person will seemingly be from the people
of Paradise, but in reality isn't
and then he is exposed for that.
But how do we explain the second
part of the hadith? Where a person
seemingly does the actions
of the people of the hellfire
but in reality then
Qadar overtakes him and he enters
into Paradise. This too also
has two perspectives to it.
Number one is
that this person has
goodness in his heart, but
because of his surroundings, he has just
been completely led astray. So these
are Muslims by definition
that they were raised in a Muslim
household. They have Muslim names
but they know nothing about
Islam whatsoever. However
as soon as Islam comes
to them, they'll accept it right away
and that is what they die upon. And this
is what you see some of the sahabah radiAllahu anhu
they accepted Islam, they went onto
the battlefield and they died right away and they
were guaranteed Paradise. Because they had that goodness
their fitra was still intact.
So as soon as Islam came
then all of a sudden it was very easy for
them to accept. Very easy for them
to accept. And then there was a second
approach that was taken, pertaining
to the second part. And this is something that is important
to know as well. Our predecessors
when they spoke about Qadar
they had two important principles
relating to it. And this is what I want to conclude
with. Number one
is that Qadar sirrullah.
It is the secret of Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala.
And the secret of Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
will not truly be understood.
Meaning that as much as you try to put
your intellect to it, you're not truly
going to understand how it works. Because
Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala is beyond space and
time. He is the creator of the intellects
and therefore anything we understand
is restricted to space and time
and is restricted to what our minds
can possibly comprehend. And Allah
subhanahu wa ta'ala is beyond
that. Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala is
beyond that. The second principle they
had. That when it comes to matters of Qadar
pass it just as
it came. Meaning that ahadith
pertaining to Qadar, ayat pertaining to Qadar
don't try to dwell into them
but rather just pass them on as
they came. As long as you believe
this is from the messenger of Allah, accept
it at face value. Don't question it.
Don't challenge it. Because at the end
of the day, the messenger of Allah and
Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala won't lose anything.
But you are the one that's going to lose out
by trying to question it. And this is where
submission and faith come into play.
That your Islam is based
upon submission to Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala.
And as long as you continuously
submit to Allah, you will be guided.
But the second you try to
rebel and start questioning
Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala, then that is
when you have already begun to go
astray. And Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
knows best. Now I'm
assuming we have questions?
People have questions? Okay. We'll leave
five, ten minutes for questions
with Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala and we'll call it a night.
Jazakumullahu khayran to everyone for sticking around.
I know usually we conclude at nine, but I took
the extra ten minutes to explain that. Anything
that I've said that is correct is from Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala.
Anything that I've said that is incorrect
is from myself and from shaytan.
Subhanak allahum wa bihamdik ash-shahadu
an la ilaha illa anta astaghfiruka
wa at-tubu ilayk.